Docs for Knn UDF v.2 (#5172)
ydb-platform/ydb: ydb/docs/en/core/yql/reference/yql-core/udf/list/knn.md

The k-NN problem solution is divided into two major subclasses of methods: exact and approximate.

### Exact method

The exact method is based on calculating the distance from the query point to every other point in the database. This algorithm, also known as the naive approach, has a complexity of `O(dn)`, where `n` is the number of points in the dataset, and `d` is its dimension.

The advantage of the method is that there is no need for additional data structures, such as specialized vector indexes.
The disadvantage is the need for a complete data search. But this disadvantage is insignificant in cases where data has been pre-filtered, for example, by user ID.

Example:

```sql
$TargetEmbedding = Knn::ToBinaryStringFloat([1.2f, 2.3f, 3.4f, 4.5f]);

SELECT id, fact, embedding FROM Facts
WHERE user="Williams"
ORDER BY Knn::CosineDistance(embedding, $TargetEmbedding)
LIMIT 10;
```

### Approximate methods

> There are a lot of approximate methods. In this document we will talk about scalar quantization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are multiple possible approximate methods. In this document, we will focus on scalar quantization.
```

> Scalar quantization is method to compress vectors, when coordinate mapped to space with lower size.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Scalar quantization** is a method to compress vectors by mapping coordinates to a smaller space.
```

> {{ ydb-short-name }} support exact search for `Float`, `Int8`, `Uint8`, `Bit` vectors.
> So it's possible to apply scalar quantization from `Float` to one of these types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{ ydb-short-name }} support exact search for `Float`, `Int8`, `Uint8`, `Bit` vectors.
So, it's possible to apply scalar quantization from `Float` to one of these other types.
```

> Scalar quantization decrease read/write time because we need to read/write less bytes in few times.
> For an example for `Float` -> `Bit` in `32` times.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Scalar quantization decreases read/write times by reducing vector size in bytes. For example, after quantization from `Float` to `Bit,` each vector becomes 32 times smaller.
```

{% note info %}

> It's important to remember that you probably needed to measure is it sufficient accuracy/recall or not.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is recommended to measure if such transformation provides sufficient accuracy/recall.
```

The advantage of the method is that there is no need for additional data structures, such as specialized vector indexes.
The disadvantage is the need for a full data scan. But this disadvantage is insignificant in cases where data has been pre-filtered, for example, by user ID.

Example:

```sql
$TargetEmbedding = Knn::ToBinaryStringFloat([1.2f, 2.3f, 3.4f, 4.5f]);

SELECT id, fact, embedding FROM Facts
WHERE user="Williams"
ORDER BY Knn::CosineDistance(embedding, $TargetEmbedding)
LIMIT 10;
```

### Approximate methods

There are multiple possible approximate methods. In this document, we will focus on scalar quantization.

**Scalar quantization** is a method to compress vectors by mapping coordinates to a smaller space.
{{ ydb-short-name }} support exact search for `Float`, `Int8`, `Uint8`, `Bit` vectors.
So, it's possible to apply scalar quantization from `Float` to one of these other types.

Scalar quantization decreases read/write times by reducing vector size in bytes. For example, after quantization from `Float` to `Bit,` each vector becomes 32 times smaller.

{% note info %}

> It is recommended to measure if such transformation provides sufficient accuracy/recall.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is recommended to measure if such quantization provides sufficient accuracy/recall.
```

{% endnote %}

Similarity functions:
* inner product `InnerProductSimilarity`, it's `dot product` for us, also known as `scalar product` (sum of products of coordinates)
* cosine similarity `CosineSimilarity` (inner product / product of vector lengths)

Distance functions:
* cosine distance `CosineDistance` (1 - cosine similarity)
* mahattan distance `ManhattanDistance`, also known as `L1 distance` (sum of modules of coordinate difference)
* euclidean distance `EuclideanDistance`, also known as `L2 distance` (square root of sum of squares of coordinate difference)

#### Function signatures

```sql
Knn::InnerProductSimilarity(String{Flags:AutoMap}, String{Flags:AutoMap})->Float?
Knn::CosineSimilarity(String{Flags:AutoMap}, String{Flags:AutoMap})->Float?
Knn::CosineDistance(String{Flags:AutoMap}, String{Flags:AutoMap})->Float?
Knn::ManhattanDistance(String{Flags:AutoMap}, String{Flags:AutoMap})->Float?
Knn::EuclideanDistance(String{Flags:AutoMap}, String{Flags:AutoMap})->Float?
```

In case of different length or format, these functions return `NULL`.

{% note info %}

> All distance and similarity functions support overloads when first or second argument

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All distance and similarity functions support overloads when first or second arguments
```

> can be `Tagged<String, "FloatVector">`, `Tagged<String, "Uint8Vector">`, `Tagged<String, "Int8Vector">`, `Tagged<String, "BitVector">`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
are `Tagged<String, "FloatVector">`, `Tagged<String, "Uint8Vector">`, `Tagged<String, "Int8Vector">`, `Tagged<String, "BitVector">`.
```

> If both arguments are `Tagged`, value of tag should be same, overwise will be error for this request.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If both arguments are `Tagged`, value of tag should be same, overwise there will be an error for this request.
```

Vector functions are implemented as user-defined functions (UDF) in the `Knn` module.

### Functions for converting between vector and binary representations

> Conversion functions are needed to serialize the vector set into an internal binary representation and vice versa.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Conversion functions are needed to serialize vectors into an internal binary representation and vice versa.
```

> All conversation functions returns [Tagged](../../types/special.md) types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All conversation functions wrap returned data into [Tagged](../../types/special.md) types.
```

> The binary representation of a vector can be persisted in a {{ ydb-short-name }} table column, {{ ydb-short-name }} doesn't support storing `Tagged` types, so user should store them as `String` type using [Untag](../../builtins/basic#as-tagged) function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% note info %}

To persist vector's binary representation in a {{ ydb-short-name }} table column,  use [Untag](../../builtins/basic#as-tagged) function first because {{ ydb-short-name }} doesn't support storing `Tagged` types.

{% endnote %}
```

#### Function signatures

```sql
Knn::ToBinaryStringFloat(List<Float>{Flags:AutoMap})->Tagged<String, "FloatVector">
Knn::ToBinaryStringUint8(List<Uint8>{Flags:AutoMap})->Tagged<String, "Uint8Vector">
Knn::ToBinaryStringInt8(List<Int8>{Flags:AutoMap})->Tagged<String, "Int8Vector">
Knn::ToBinaryStringBit(List<Double>{Flags:AutoMap})->Tagged<String, "BitVector">
Knn::ToBinaryStringBit(List<Float>{Flags:AutoMap})->Tagged<String, "BitVector">
Knn::ToBinaryStringBit(List<Uint8>{Flags:AutoMap})->Tagged<String, "BitVector">
Knn::ToBinaryStringBit(List<Int8>{Flags:AutoMap})->Tagged<String, "BitVector">
Knn::FloatFromBinaryString(String{Flags:AutoMap})->List<Float>?
```

> 
> * `ToBinaryStringBit` -- coordinates that greater than `0` are mapped to `1`, other coordinates are mapped to `0`.
> * `ToBinaryStringBit`, `ToBinaryStringUint8`, `ToBinaryStringInt8` -- commonly used for quantization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

#### Implementation details

The `ToBinaryStringBit` function maps coordinates that are greater than `0` to `1`. All other coordinates are mapped to `0`.

`ToBinaryStringBit`, `ToBinaryStringUint8`, and `ToBinaryStringInt8` are commonly used for quantization.
```

#### Function signatures

```sql
Knn::ToBinaryStringFloat(List<Float>{Flags:AutoMap})->Tagged<String, "FloatVector">
Knn::ToBinaryStringUint8(List<Uint8>{Flags:AutoMap})->Tagged<String, "Uint8Vector">
Knn::ToBinaryStringInt8(List<Int8>{Flags:AutoMap})->Tagged<String, "Int8Vector">
Knn::ToBinaryStringBit(List<Double>{Flags:AutoMap})->Tagged<String, "BitVector">
Knn::ToBinaryStringBit(List<Float>{Flags:AutoMap})->Tagged<String, "BitVector">
Knn::ToBinaryStringBit(List<Uint8>{Flags:AutoMap})->Tagged<String, "BitVector">
Knn::ToBinaryStringBit(List<Int8>{Flags:AutoMap})->Tagged<String, "BitVector">
Knn::FloatFromBinaryString(String{Flags:AutoMap})->List<Float>?
```

> * `ToBinaryStringBit` -- translate to `1` all coordinates that greater than `0`, other coordinates translated to `0`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `ToBinaryStringBit` -- coordinates that greater than `0` are mapped to `1`, other coordinates are mapped to `0`.
```

{% endnote %}

Similarity functions:
* inner product `InnerProductSimilarity`, it's the dot product, also known as the scalar product (sum of products of coordinates)
* cosine similarity `CosineSimilarity` (dot product divided by product of vector lengths)

Distance functions:
* cosine distance `CosineDistance` (1 - cosine similarity)

> * mahattan distance `ManhattanDistance`, also known as `L1 distance` (sum of modules of coordinate differences)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* manhattan distance `ManhattanDistance`, also known as `L1 distance` (sum of modules of coordinate differences)
```

SELECT * FROM Facts
WHERE user="Williams"
ORDER BY Knn::CosineDistance(embedding, $TargetEmbedding)
LIMIT $K;
```

### Exact search of vectors in radius R

```sql
$R = 0.1f;
$TargetEmbedding = Knn::ToBinaryStringFloat([1.2f, 2.3f, 3.4f, 4.5f]);

SELECT * FROM Facts
WHERE Knn::CosineDistance(embedding, $TargetEmbedding) < $R;
```

## Approximate search examples

### Creating a table

```sql
CREATE TABLE Facts (
    id Uint64,        -- Id of fact
    user Utf8,        -- User name
    fact Utf8,        -- Human-readable description of a user fact
    embedding String, -- Binary representation of embedding vector (result of Knn::ToBinaryStringFloat)
    embedding_bit String, -- Binary representation of embedding vector (result of Knn::ToBinaryStringBit)
    PRIMARY KEY (id)
);
```

### Adding vectors

```sql
$vector = [1.f, 2.f, 3.f, 4.f];
UPSERT INTO Facts (id, user, fact, embedding, embedding_bit) 
VALUES (123, "Williams", "Full name is John Williams", Untag(Knn::ToBinaryStringFloat($vector), "FloatVector"), Untag(Knn::ToBinaryStringBit($vector), "BitVector"));
```

### Scalar quantization

An ML model can do quantization, or it can be done manually with YQL.

> Below are quantization example in YQL.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Below there is a quantization example in YQL.
```

{% endnote %}

Similarity functions:

> * inner product `InnerProductSimilarity`, it's `dot product` for us, also known as `scalar product` (sum of products of coordinates)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* inner product `InnerProductSimilarity`, it's the dot product, also known as the scalar product (sum of products of coordinates)
```

> * cosine similarity `CosineSimilarity` (inner product / product of vector lengths)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* cosine similarity `CosineSimilarity` (inner product divided by product of vector lengths)
```

Distance functions:
* cosine distance `CosineDistance` (1 - cosine similarity)

> * mahattan distance `ManhattanDistance`, also known as `L1 distance` (sum of modules of coordinate difference)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* mahattan distance `ManhattanDistance`, also known as `L1 distance` (sum of modules of coordinate differences)
```

> * mahattan distance `ManhattanDistance`, also known as `L1 distance` (sum of modules of coordinate difference)

Reviewer: It may be about time to add actual formulas here. Here's the documentation on how to do it:
https://diplodoc.com/docs/en/syntax/additional#formulas

> * euclidean distance `EuclideanDistance`, also known as `L2 distance` (square root of sum of squares of coordinate difference)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* euclidean distance `EuclideanDistance`, also known as `L2 distance` (square root of the sum of squares of coordinate differences)
```

#### Function signatures

```sql
Knn::InnerProductSimilarity(String{Flags:AutoMap}, String{Flags:AutoMap})->Float?
Knn::CosineSimilarity(String{Flags:AutoMap}, String{Flags:AutoMap})->Float?
Knn::CosineDistance(String{Flags:AutoMap}, String{Flags:AutoMap})->Float?
Knn::ManhattanDistance(String{Flags:AutoMap}, String{Flags:AutoMap})->Float?
Knn::EuclideanDistance(String{Flags:AutoMap}, String{Flags:AutoMap})->Float?
```

> In case of different length or format, these functions return `NULL`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In case of mismatched lengths or formats, these functions return `NULL`.
```

{% note info %}

All distance and similarity functions support overloads when first or second arguments are `Tagged<String, "FloatVector">`, `Tagged<String, "Uint8Vector">`, `Tagged<String, "Int8Vector">`, `Tagged<String, "BitVector">`.

> If both arguments are `Tagged`, value of tag should be same, overwise there will be an error for this request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If both arguments are `Tagged`, tag values should match, or the query will raise an error.
```

Reviewer: example error message would be useful here

{% endnote %}

> ## Examples of exact search

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Еxact search examples
```

### Creating a table

```sql
CREATE TABLE Facts (
    id Uint64,        -- Id of fact
    user Utf8,        -- User name
    fact Utf8,        -- Human-readable description of a user fact
    embedding String, -- Binary representation of embedding vector (result of Knn::ToBinaryStringFloat)
    PRIMARY KEY (id)
);
```

### Adding vectors

```sql
$vector = [1.f, 2.f, 3.f, 4.f];
UPSERT INTO Facts (id, user, fact, embedding) 
VALUES (123, "Williams", "Full name is John Williams", Untag(Knn::ToBinaryStringFloat($vector), "FloatVector"));
```

### Exact search of K nearest vectors

```sql
$K = 10;
$TargetEmbedding = Knn::ToBinaryStringFloat([1.2f, 2.3f, 3.4f, 4.5f]);

SELECT * FROM Facts
WHERE user="Williams"
ORDER BY Knn::CosineDistance(embedding, $TargetEmbedding)
LIMIT $K;
```

### Exact search of vectors in radius R

```sql
$R = 0.1f;
$TargetEmbedding = Knn::ToBinaryStringFloat([1.2f, 2.3f, 3.4f, 4.5f]);

SELECT * FROM Facts
WHERE Knn::CosineDistance(embedding, $TargetEmbedding) < $R;
```

> ## Examples of approximate search

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Approximate search examples
```

### Creating a table

```sql
CREATE TABLE Facts (
    id Uint64,        -- Id of fact
    user Utf8,        -- User name
    fact Utf8,        -- Human-readable description of a user fact
    embedding String, -- Binary representation of embedding vector (result of Knn::ToBinaryStringFloat)
    embedding_bit String, -- Binary representation of embedding vector (result of Knn::ToBinaryStringBit)
    PRIMARY KEY (id)
);
```

### Adding vectors

```sql
$vector = [1.f, 2.f, 3.f, 4.f];
UPSERT INTO Facts (id, user, fact, embedding, embedding_bit) 
VALUES (123, "Williams", "Full name is John Williams", Untag(Knn::ToBinaryStringFloat($vector), "FloatVector"), Untag(Knn::ToBinaryStringBit($vector), "BitVector"));
```

### Quantization

> Quantization can be done by ML model, or this can be done in YQL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An ML model can do quantization, or it can be done manually with YQL.
```

> Here examples of quantization in YQL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below are quantization examples in YQL.
```

#### Float -> Int8

```sql
$MapInt8 = ($x) -> {
    $min = -5.0f;
    $max =  5.0f;
    $dist = $max - $min;

> 	RETURN Cast(Math::Round(IF($x < $min, -127, IF($x > $max, 127, ($x / $dist) * 255))) As Int8)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	RETURN CAST(Math::Round(IF($x < $min, -127, IF($x > $max, 127, ($x / $dist) * 255))) As Int8)
```

};
```

#### Float -> Uint8

```sql
$MapUint8 = ($x) -> {
    $min = -5.0f;
    $max =  5.0f;
    $dist = $max - $min;

> 	RETURN Cast(Math::Round(IF($x < $min, 0, IF($x > $max, 255, (($x - $min) / $dist) * 255))) As Uint8)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	RETURN CAST(Math::Round(IF($x < $min, 0, IF($x > $max, 255, (($x - $min) / $dist) * 255))) As Uint8)
```

VALUES (123, "Williams", "Full name is John Williams", Knn::ToBinaryString([1.0f, 2.0f, 3.0f, 4.0f]))
```

{% note info %}

> {{ ydb-short-name }} doesn't support storing `Tagged` types, so user should store them as `String`, to achive this user can use `Untag` function.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{{ ydb-short-name }} doesn't support storing `Tagged` types, so user should store them as `String` type using `Untag` function.
```
